Very nice to have you here with us, Minister.
Now, we've got 45 minutes with you, just to be clear.
And obviously you introduced your team, some of whom we've seen many
times before. I think we've seen everyone, virtually.
But anyway, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think you do know the
team that are with me, so I won't go through introductions except to say that we
have Ministry of Justice, including a good part of the firearms team
that are here with us today. But I'll just have some
brief introductory remarks. Mr. Chair, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before the committee today as Associate Minister of
Justice, and I will keep my opening remarks brief just for the benefit of
the Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Oh, that's a... Oh.
The Associate Justice portfolio covers a range of areas
including firearms, alcohol, adoption, anti-money laundering,
and more. Across all these distinct areas, it is
necessary to protect public safety while also ensuring
that law-abiding New Zealanders can go about their business and enjoy their
lives without unnecessary red tape, cost, and paperwork.
Regulation needs to be practical, proportionate, and workable for the people
and businesses who follow the rules.
On firearms, we are reforming the law, regulations, and
institutions to improve public safety while treating
licensed firearm owners fairly.
Budget 2026 provides $44.9 million
over four years to deliver the Arms Act rewrite so that we have
a firearm system that improves public safety, trust,
and provides efficient, effective, and responsive
regulatory services to licensed firearm owners.
We are also overhauling New Zealand's anti-money laundering and countering
financing of terrorism system to make it easier to do
business and harder to do crime. The government has also
taken decisive action on overseas adoptions.
Last year, we moved quickly with urgent legislation to reduce the risk of
harm to some children and young people adopted
overseas. In May, the government introduced the Overseas
Adoptions Legislation Bill to replace the temporary
changes that are due to expire on
1 July 2027. And finally, our
alcohol reform package is focused on practical
regulation. The goal is to make the licensing process fairer,
make it easier to host events, and cut through red tape
affecting Kiwi businesses without increasing the risk of
alcohol-related harm. Across this portfolio, the theme
is consistent, Mr. Chair. We're protecting the public from real harm,
backing legitimate users and businesses, and cutting red tape
where it is safe to do so. I'm now open to take questions.
What a perfectly timed introduction.
Right, I'm going to turn to Honorable Ginny Andersen.
Thank you very much. Thank you for your introductory remarks, Minister.
I've had a couple of
emails through from members of the public who are firearm owners who have raised
the same issue, and it's a new type of firearm that's been
available called a push-button rifle.
And you might know more than I, but it's described as not quite a
semiautomatic, but very close. It has a button on the receiver.
It has to be pushed to load another cartridge.
It cycles slower than, say, an AR-15, but faster
than any other type of repeating gun and is designed so firing can take
place very rapidly and comes in a .223 caliber.
There's a concern being raised that there's a weakness in our laws, that these
aren't covered by the current legislation.
Do you have a view on whether they should be prohibited or where they should sit
in terms of their capability?
Thank you. Thanks to the member for her question, because there is some
information out there that I don't think is quite right on the push-button
firearms. For example, it's not a new type of action
or a new type of firearm. It's been around for quite some substantial period of
time. It has been approved by New Zealand Police to be
within the country. It is nothing like a semiautomatic at
all. It can run either on gas or on
inertia.
And a semiautomatic is where a firearm will,
once you pull a trigger, it will fire, it will
eject, and it will reload a new round ready
for the person or the operator to just pull the trigger
again. A push-button firearm does not work like that.
When the trigger has been pulled, a round will expel,
the action will open, a round will pop
out, but the action is actually held back, or the bolt is held back.
So it's not-- A semiautomatic is where you go through the entire process,
all of the steps all at once. This does not occur with a push button.
In order to load the next round, to have
the chamber locked, you need to push that button, and that actually
requires a person to remove their finger to enable that to
happen, depending on the type.
Yeah.
And
it is nothing at all like the
semiautomatics. So I think that that's misinformation that might be
getting out there by people that it's similar to. I don't believe that it is.
One would argue that a lever action could be seen as that as well,
and that there are other types of firearms that can be seen like that as well.
But I think what we can-
... come down to, as they have been around for a very long time.
Okay, let's move to the budget now.
Okay.
The $4.7 million of funding for the new Firearms Licensing Review
Committee,
what date do you expect to appoint the individuals to these roles?
We would like to see that the Firearms Licensing Review Committee is stood
up and ready to go as soon as the
changeover occurs.
We will be advertising shortly for those positions.
In fact, I think they're underway now, the advertisements for the licensing
review committee,
in order to make sure that we have the right people in place ready to go from
day one.
Is it likely to be a minister yourself, or is it Minister Goldsmith who'll
be doing the appointing of those roles?
Well, the interviews for those roles will actually occur under the Ministry of
Justice, and the minister in charge of firearms will be the
person that appoints those roles.
So it will actually go through a process that the ministry will undertake, and they
will deliver, as they usually do, recommendations to the minister
to make the final decisions.
What checks and balances are there for the new firearms regime in terms of
appointments? So will the Public Service Commission play any sort of
oversight role with the new chief exec of the organization,
understanding it's a statutory appointment and not core public service?
Can you just give us a bit more information on how that works?
I'm actually going to pass that over.
Because of the serious accusations that have been personally made
against me in regard to appointments within this realm,
I've actually handed the entire lot over to the Ministry of Justice, so
perhaps they could answer that question for you.
So I can talk to that. Clearly this committee has considered some of the
submissions that came in on the firearms legislation in terms of
ensuring an appropriately independent appointment process, and there
are particular responsibilities given me.
They've been designed to, as closely as
possible, follow the public services approach.
The reason that they are with the Ministry of Justice rather than the public
service is that police is not a public service department, and so we'd
had to recreate that. I've run the process that's underway at the
moment in terms of identifying a chief executive for the new agency.
We have been very deliberate to follow the PSC type of process.
I've actually had the deputy state services public services commissioner, Heather
Baggett, on my interview panel
as well. And so we've been very clear, as the minister says, to
basically bring
almost exactly the same rigor and process that the Public Services Commission would
bring to it, just so that it can be
plenty of public confidence in the appointment.
So New Zealanders can expect to see a fair reflection of people who represent those
who have an interest in firearms and public safety on that group?
I'm talking about the chief executive.
Oh, chief executive.
The out-
So I was meaning like the, once the actual panel
itself, or the new body, the representatives who are appointed onto that
group,
can New Zealanders expect to see a fair representation of those who have an
interest in firearms?
Yes. I'll just be clear, the comments I was making were in relation to the chief
executive.
Chief executive.
And with respect to the
members of the group, we would go through a process.
We go through those sorts of processes across the board, and we provide advice to
ministers that we give our best assessment against criteria that would cover
off the sorts of things that you'd expect to see.
And who makes that final determination on who makes it onto that group?
I think the decisions on that will be the minister's decisions at the end of the
day on, as is always the case with these sorts of appointments.
And that's Associate Justice or Justice who makes that call?
It's Associate Justice.
I would say it's probably, because it says in the legislation the minister in
charge of firearms. But if there is a recommendation that
appoints somebody that I may know, I will step out of that,
as I have been doing throughout this term, and that
decision will fall probably onto the Minister of Justice.
Thank you.
Yeah, can I just observe, because I think Ian asked another question.
In terms of the criteria that you referred to for the panel,
who will determine that, and would that be in line with public service
PSA
guidelines?
The criteria is set out in the legislation of what the three panel
members will need to have as criteria.
One of them needs to be a lawyer with legal experience over five
years. Another one would be a licensed firearm owner, and
the other one will have some sort of regulatory experience
and understanding in that realm, as well as having some knowledge on
firearms.
Okay. All right, cool. You're right.
I'm going to go to Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Supplementary. To stay on the topic of arms, obviously that
legislation's still before this actual committee, but money has been set aside in
the budget. If the legislation passes,
what will that money be used for? What are the next steps of, I suppose,
operationalizing the Arms Act if passed?
Thank you. The $44.9 million that has been
allocated is specifically for the implementation of the new Arms
Act regime. So that will include the discussions that we've just
had on the Firearms Licensing Review Committee
to make sure that we set them up really well, as well as
the separation of the regulator from the enforcer,
and making sure that they are up and fit for purpose as
well when they run. There's
agreements that will be needed to be made with New Zealand Police
on purchasing services from them to ensure
that there is no breakdown in services that are available because we
are still having this vote under New Zealand Police, although it's
managed by the Ministry of Justice.
So we need to ensure that the flow is
adequate between the new regulator and New Zealand Police.
So there will be some discussions that will be had
between the two about some of those things that need to be picked up
And these costs will help pay for that.
Just a quick supplementary, Mr. Kibblewhite.
So I assume a lot of that operational detail the minister's talking about-
Mm
... the planning is already underway and-
Uh
... the ministry's overseeing all that?
We are. We've appointed an establishment chief executive who's with us today.
Lukasz is sitting behind me here. So he
is stepping that through. He's working both with the ministry and with
police and with the current Firearm Safety Authority and just
generally helping to shepherd that through.
So we are doing a,
we've got effectively a comprehensive work program to set this
up and establish it and have it ready to go.
So just one last-
Oh, may I just add to that, there's also a
contingency within that $44.9 million that goes towards the
courts to help pay for a judge. This is because we are
introducing infringement notices, and we are upping the
penalties as well as new offenses within the Arms Act.
So we're ensuring that the courts are able to
be able to operate once we start enforcing some of these.
Great. So subject to Parliament doing its work-
Mm
... you're confident that justice will be able to deliver this new
Arms Act regime with all the steps you've taken?
Well, we're certainly confident in the implementation process-
Yeah
... that we have underway at the moment.
There will be obviously a new entity created.
They will take over that mantle. There'll be a
close cooperation with police who will still be
hosting that independent entity.
And so potentially between the three agents, the new agency,
the existing agency, and then police and the Ministry of Justice, yes, I'm
confident that that's all on track.
Thank you. So before we get a new topic, anyone else want to ask about the
Firearm Safety Authority?
So we'll put that one to bed.
Uh-
Or do you want to... For example, I like to do them in groups. Right?
They're different from safety education
.
Well, no, we can go into that.
If I may explain.
Yeah.
The current authority that sits within New Zealand Police is called the Firearm
Safety Authority or Te Tari Pūreke.
Once the transfer occurs or we have royal assent of the
bill, Firearm Safety Authority will then become Firearm Safety and
Education New Zealand at that stage.
There you go. Let's finish this topic, and then we'll move to new stuff.
So,
is there any sort of view on how that's going to operate?
So I know that when that shift happens, that there won't be
police in there. But is there going to be an MOU
or there'll be some institutional knowledge that'll be needed?
Is there any more sort of detail on how the funding and all those
sort of things work?
Yeah. I'll give you high level, and if there's something else that Lukasz
can add, then he definitely will. But,
yes, look, sorry, what was the question?
So,
how will it work in practice?
How it's going to work.
Will there be an MOU setting out terms of agreement?
Between the police.
Yes.
Is there a code of conduct for those affected and dealt with by police systems and
HR, those housed within the Regulatory Authority or the Ministry of Justice, which
has oversight over monitoring the regulator?
Yeah.
All that sort of detail that we haven't seen-
Yes
... are we able to see any of that?
Yes, there will be agreements that will be made.
We're actually working through a system of figuring out what actually needs
to occur to make sure that both police have the information that they need, and the
new regulator have these as well. There'll be new
police liaison teams set up to work between New
Zealand Police and the Firearm Safety and Education New Zealand as well.
And of course, we'll be implementing a red flag system, which will bring in
other government agencies so that they can look to share information.
So we don't have a situation like we had in 2019,
where Brenton Tarrant was able to maneuver his way through
our legislative system without government agencies being able to
have any foresight or input. So we're trying to close
those gaps there, and we will make sure that that is operational.
We will have firearms or arms officers working out of
some police stations as well, so there'll be agreements that will need to be made
between the new authority as well as New Zealand Police to make sure that
they're still operational. Do you have anything to add to that, Lukasz?
So at an agency to agency level, we'll have what's called a host
agency agreement with police. So that sets out everything from real
estate to desk space to corporate services and what it looks like.
And we are working through at the moment with the Association of the Employment
Level, what that means for folks who are currently police employees who will be
FSE staff in the future. And as the minister says, we're also working through the
information sharing and data access agreements to support the right
flow of information to improve public safety.
And is there any specific allocation within the budget specifically for IT?
Because I know one of the fears has been that that real time
intelligence for putting up red flags.
Is there any additional funding in the budget to enable to make sure that the IT
capability enables there to be very quick transfer of intel when
required?
Yes, there is. And if you have a look at the budget lines, you'll see that there is
an ICT tag contingency that has no money appropriated to it.
There is money appropriated to it, but the reason why it doesn't show in the budget
lines is for commercial sensitivities as they start to
negotiate what those ICT upgrades will need to look
like going into the future.
And is there any kind of indication about what that might be?
ICT, we know can do lots of different things for government.
Is there any kind of ballpark figure? I know there's been, is it 4.7?
Is it within that 4.7 that's been allocated, or is that in addition to that?
The $44.9 million that have been allocated to arms does not
include anything to do with ICT, and it's not appropriate for me while
the negotiations are taking place to even indicate what a
figure may be at that stage. But by the time we get through that and we
come back next term,
we'll be able to show you exactly what those figures are.
But do you know what pot of money that would come from in the future, or that's
unknown?
The money has already been set aside in a tag contingency, so the money is sitting
there.
Right. I've got a supplementary from Rima Nakle.
Supplementary today again, Minister and team.
Just with respect to the ICT normalization, Minister, how are we
expecting that these improvements will benefit both public safety
and service delivery?
Well, what we have at the moment is ICT that is not
working the way that it should do. So being able to
upgrade it and having it fit for purpose is going to benefit not only the
licensed firearm owners, but the Firearm Safety and Education New Zealand as
they take over, and also, most importantly, New Zealand Police.
At the moment, there are three different ICT systems that do not speak to
each other. So the first thing we need to do is be able to pull them all together,
make sure that they're safe and secure, and make sure that the relevant
access is available to those that need it.
Mm. Thanks, Minister.
Okay, let's go to a new topic.
Mr.-
Oh.
Sorry, Mr. Chair, just before you move on to a new topic, I'd just like to express
my thanks to the Justice Select Committee for their hard work on the firearms
legislation. I understand it's been very constructive, and
I'm really pleased to hear that the committee has worked so well together, and I'd
just like to take the opportunity to thank them for that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Minister.
Right.
Scott, do you want anything, or have you got a new line of thinking?
No.
Not yet. Right. I'm going to go back to Honorable Jenny Anderson.
Thank you very much. How many FTEs are planned for the
regulator, and how does that compare to the Firearm Safety Authority?
The way that this is going to operate is on day one, and day one will be
the day after royal assent. There will be no changes apart
from those that are
what I would call blue shirts. Members of New Zealand Police will
be moving out of the Firearm Safety and Education.
I believe there's 12 at the moment that are going
through a process with New Zealand Police to integrate back into other
areas within Police. Everybody else will move over into the new
entity.
And why don't you want Police in there?
Well, this is about rebuilding trust and confidence, but it's also about making
sure that Police stick to their core business, which they do so well, and that's
enforcement. So what we're doing is removing the
regulatory and administration side of arms from New Zealand
Police,
giving it to this new entity, and allowing New Zealand Police to solely
concentrate on enforcement, which is their core business.
I think many New Zealanders would think that they do trust New Zealand
Police, particularly around their institutional knowledge of firearms.
Why do you take a different position to that?
And I think this is where it's really important that we still keep the police
liaison team in place because they do have some
knowledge there. But they're not the only ones with knowledge, and
there is no reason why the Firearm Safety Authority in the future
can't start bringing in others with knowledge.
Police are not the only people with knowledge about firearms, extensive knowledge,
and I would argue that there are other and better experts within
New Zealand that would be available.
But don't you think it's kind of doing New Zealand a disservice that if there is
someone who has good knowledge on firearms and they just so happen to be
a police officer, wouldn't we want to draw upon that knowledge?
Sure. You would want to, and in some respects, they'll still be there.
So to give you an example, new imports of new firearms will still be
looked at at this stage by the team of New Zealand Police because they are the
ones that already understand what it is that they're looking for.
So we're not actually removing that part at this stage because they are the
experts in that field. But I'm sure that they are not the only experts
in that field. So it's not about just getting rid of something for the sake of it
because public safety is still front of mind.
So they will still continue to have that team.
But as I mentioned before, New Zealand Police are not the only experts, and I
believe there are other experts out in the community that have more knowledge than
some of them.
What if someone leaves Police for a while and then comes? Is that okay then?
Well, they're no longer employed by New Zealand Police-
Right
... which is a commitment that we made to the licensed firearm
owners. I hear what you say about other New Zealanders, but there is
a large portion of, I'll call them LFOs, within New
Zealand that need that trust and confidence to be rebuilt.
And presumably, there'll be a lot of senior police
staff who leave the police force, either because of age or other
reasons, who are likely to want to be employed
under the license as it was prior to
2019 or whenever the reforms were brought in.
Correct. Look, I understand at the moment that there are some that
have actually left Police and are employed by Firearm Safety
Authority, and they are quite welcome to move over.
Yeah. Okay.
What's the expected establishment date for the Firearm Safety and Education
New Zealand new unit?
We're hoping that we will get through legislation and
have it go live, so to speak, around late September.
Late September. Thank you. And
I think you might have answered this, but I'll just check.
Will police staff currently performing firearms licensing functions for Te Tari
Puraki, will they have the opportunity to transfer to the new, or
they just don't, they don't?
If they are signed up with New Zealand Police, they will not be transferring over,
no.
And that's the employment issue you're dealing with at the moment in terms of
police association. They'll figure out what happens.
Yes. My understanding is that they will go back into the bigger
police pool and will be reallocated new jobs.
I'll go to Scott.
Do one more or?
One more, and then I'm going to go to Scott.
On the authority's website, reported trust and confidence in the authority
is at 65%. Has there been any modeling done to estimate an
expected increase in trust and confidence with the separation of the
firearms regulation from police?
Not to the best of our knowledge
No, not yet.
Not yet. Is that something you might think of doing?
I think it's something that would be really important to do into the future,
because we do need to see whether or not we are achieving what we want
to. I'm hearing from the firearms community that some subtle changes
that have been made already is helping to establish these new
baselines. It's starting to work already, and I thank Rakesh,
who's come in as acting chief executive, for some of the culture
change that we're starting to see and some of the improvements.
So I think it would be a good idea to look at that into the future.
But let's get established first.
Right.
Scott. Scott Willis.
I may have missed an answer you've given to this, but what are the costs of the
firearm safety ICT upgrades? What are we
looking at?
You did miss it. We just went through and said that we won't be giving exact
figures due to commercial sensitivity, and that is the reason why you
see in the budget lines an ICT tag contingency with no
figures to it. That's due to commercial sensitivities while the
organization actually starts to look to employ or
contract those to come in and do that work.
Okay.
Any more questions on them? No. Right. Who else wants to ask a question?
Oh, on a different topic.
Yep. Let's go to a different-- I think we've done that, eh?
Let's... And thank you for your assistance. Right.
Todd.
If I may say, Mr. Chair, I do have an open door policy and
invite the member, if she has more questions, to come and talk to me about them.
I have made that open door policy to all opposition at any
stage, and I'm willing to continue that.
I did have one more, but-
One more.
Okay.
It was on the ICT stuff.
Will that ensure that police still have continued access to the
firearms regulators information?
Do police get still full access to what's in there?
Once we have that ICT set up, and we don't know what
it's going to look like. So I had said to you that there are three different
ICT
workings that we have at the moment that don't speak to each other.
One of them sits within police, and the other two sit outside of
police. So we need to actually understand what the new ICT is going to look like
to understand whether or not police and other agencies have direct
access or whether or not they get the information through the regulator.
What is very important is that where police need to have real
time access, they should continue to do so, especially in very
quickly evolving situations. There is no intent
whatsoever to leave police out of that, but what it's actually going to look like
will depend on what the ICT solution looks like and whether or not it's
direct access or whether it's by agreement, depending on what the
ICT actually looks like once it's implemented.
Okay. Well, hopefully we're going with something like AML or something like that.
Adoption, I was going to say.
Adoption. Okay.
Is that okay?
Is that okay, Minister? I'm going to do adoption.
Thank you.
It was either that or AML, but I've decided to go with adoption.
Yes, I want to obviously talk about what this budget sets aside for this
new adoption. Again, it's legislation that's obviously before
Parliament.
Obviously, the government, and again, want to acknowledge, obviously, the
opposition stepped in last year, closed this quite serious
loophole which could allow
some various serious things to happen around
adoption. Just what have you got planned going forward?
How does this budget support your work in the adoption area so that we really do
have a robust adoption regime and we are living up
to good international standards?
Thank you for that question. The budget for
what we're doing in the adoption system will come about from the main budget that
has been allocated to the Ministry of Justice.
But it is really important that we do make the changes that we have
indicated. When we put through the temporary piece of
legislation that stopped international adoptions from occurring
under the current process, we did say that we would look to
have a more firmer
relevant piece of legislation that will
ensure that the children that are coming in from overseas will be protected.
So there is now that replacement bill sitting with the
Justice Select Committee, and we need to
ensure that what goes through the court system, what
goes through the DIA, as an example, and the Minister
for Immigration is able to
look after and protect those children.
So there are some minor changes that we're making in the way that
the adoption of children will be progressed.
But quite frankly, no matter what it costs, it
should be paid for because looking after the children, especially
children coming into New Zealand, we should be ensuring that their health
and safety is maintained. More importantly, ensuring that those
people,
some of them with really bad criminal conviction lists,
should not be able to get children in from overseas.
So
the budget line is a part of the bigger
Ministry of Justice
budget allocation. But from my point of view, whatever it costs
will be worth it if we save these children.
And just a quick supplementary. And so Justice is leading this work, but then it's
obviously got to coordinate with DIA, Immigration, and others.
Yes, they do.
Just to make sure that it all works well and everybody is able
to do their little bit, because some of the changes we're making
is a little bit in Immigration, it's a little bit in the courts.
We need to make sure that it all comes together.
But Ministry of Justice will be paying for their bit in it.
Thank you.
Can I-- I've got a supplementary from the honorable Dr.
Duncan Webb.
Just invite the minister to talk about
the surrogacy work as well in that tranche before.
I know there's a lot of people who are very interested to know what's happening in
that space, to get some certainty around
pretty personal arrangements.
Yes. Yes, the surrogacy, and I thank the committee once again for the
work on the Surrogacy Bill, because it's been going for quite some time.
The committee will know that it is a very complicated piece of
legislation. It's only just been reported back.
So at the moment, it's sitting on the order paper.
It's not a piece of legislation that I'm going to be looking at between
now and the end of term, purely because it is
so complicated and we do have quite a
large number or areas of work that we are trying to get finished
before the end of the term. We have less than three months, and I think the
Surrogacy Bill actually needs more than a quick rush to try
and get it through, especially when the committee has sat with it
for so many years. I think it deserves better contemplation
than a rush job.
All right. Thank you.
Right. Rima Nakley with another supplementary.
Yes. Supplementary, Minister, about the adoption
work.
As you know, and as I recall,
swift work was done because from what I recall from your
conversations with the House,
is that there was information and evidence that was
provided to you that was extremely alarming and
disturbing, and you needed to act to protect children.
Minister, with the work that's being done,
how are we going to be able to measure that
protection is taking place?
Well, I don't know whether or not it's a measure or perhaps a measure could end
up being that we don't see these arrests of people.
Mm.
What's really important is that we stop these people with criminal convictions
actually adopting the children in the first place and bringing them through into
New Zealand. So,
I don't know if the team actually have measures in place for it.
But I would've thought that actually not having the number
of convictions and prosecutions that we're currently seeing
will be a very good measure that we've got it into the right place.
I also feel that,
if we can ensure that the children that are coming into New Zealand
from overseas are coming from places where we have the
same sort of controls, so for example, Hague Convention,
the countries that have signed up to the Hague Convention, then we know that
within their own home countries, they are applying really good,
robust measures to ensure that children being adopted to overseas
parents are being adopted to the right people.
We had a gap in our law, and that gap has been there for quite a
few decades was my understanding.
But some of the heinous type of
stories that we were hearing, the prosecutions, the convictions that we were
seeing most recently over a couple of years indicated to me as
a mother of four, I cannot stand back and just let this continue as
subsequent governments have. We needed to do something, and so I acted
decisively and quickly.
And just a quick supplementary please.
Minister,
I know that you said that there was a gap. There is a gap.
But maybe this is for the team as well.
How did we miss
the mark and allow so many people with very
serious convictions to be able to adopt children?
Is it because of this gap?
I think because of the way the system was designed and was set up
and working, those cases weren't necessarily ones that the system had
eyes on. Because they were coming through this route
of inter-country adoption, it meant that many
of the roles that other agencies would play in a domestic
adoption weren't in play.
Mm.
And so the way that the system worked allowed that to
happen. And as minister said, they were showing up as
sideways through people reporting
more like labor exploitation and trafficking, and it
was showing up in that space rather than through
adoptions.
Through adoptions. Yeah.
So adoption was being used, but it was showing up elsewhere.
Mm.
So, um.
Thank you. It was joining the dots.
Mm.
There's a general comment there about the stewardship of legislation, so the
Ministry of Justice is a department with over 150 acts, that we're looking
after 50 different regulatory systems.
And we're actually recognizing we need to be much more systematic at
building a frame of how well all of that legislation
is dealing with the challenges that it's designed for.
Yeah.
And so Caroline and her team are going through a process, including building
much stronger relationships with universities and practitioner communities across
those different regulatory regimes.
Sounds like a case of AI.
Beautiful example of using AI, I'd imagine.
Well, there'll be some opportunities for AI, but I'd
caution from over-relying on it in that sort of situation.
Of course.
All right.
Yeah. Thank you.
Hey, now, any more on the adoption bit?
No.
Right. We're happy with that, members? Right.
Now we're going to go to a new topic-
Yes
... with Camilla Village.
Um, Minister, you've
introduced a bill, the Sale and Supply of Alcohol
Amendment Bill, and I understand there'll be
budgetary implications for the progress of that bill as it moves through
the House.
And this is kind of related to that question about the
joining up of legislation. One of the criticisms that we've
heard about that bill is the fact that the
bill, although it focuses on alcohol regulation,
may be, in some instances, inconsistent with the object of the primary piece of
legislation which it's amending, which is the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act, and
that's in relation to the focus on minimizing harm
caused by alcohol consumption. So that's been a
strong criticism that we've received on that legislation as we've been looking at
it, and I just wanted to give you the opportunity to respond to that.
I have considered the Sale and Supply of
Alcohol bill, with the justice team looking
at some of the red tape around businesses and whether or not it's
justified in the way that it is.
We found that some of it was not, that in fact it was costing
more money to business, including businesses not being
able to guarantee that they could operate year to
year.
Businesses being shut down with those wanting to object to renewals and
those objections not even coming from within New Zealand or coming from
within the same island.
So while I wanted to ensure that the
objectors still had the ability to object, they needed to be
relevant to the area that they were objecting in because we were getting case
studies showing that there were objections that were just
coming in for the sake of it. So- I do not believe that I
have done anything within the legislation that will create more alcohol
harm. I've tried to balance it in a way where it
became fairer on the businesses that were trying to operate, but also
allowed the community that were or are going to be impacted by
alcohol sales to be able to still have their fair say.
And this is why it's important to also let the community, or remind the
community, that those that are out there helping people
to do their objections, they're still available to help
them. What we are suggesting is that those that can object should
object from that territorial authority or within a kilometer of the
territorial authority's line. So I don't believe that we are
creating more harm. I think we're creating more opportunity.
We're doing some really good common sense things, like allowing zero
alcohol within bars, which hasn't been potentially
allowed in some cases. And I think that this is a
good thing to get New Zealand moving without creating more harm.
Just a quick supplementary to this, and this might be more for the team that's
assisting you.
Many of the
parts of that bill,
I think it's arguable to say that there may lead to an
increased either consumption in some instances, and that's in the
specific allowance for alcohol to be served in areas where it wasn't
previously. And also, that possibly
the changes may result in fewer
licenses,
initial licenses or renewals being declined.
Is there evidence that greater consumption of alcohol,
in a wider sense, leads to alcohol harm?
What does the evidence say about that?
I wonder if that's a question we might answer in writing to you, because
there's a bit of nuance in there that it'll be good to get right.
There's different ways in which you measure alcohol harm,
whether it's at that population level.
And so there's particular measures where you look at harm at a population level and
in these particular demographic groups in the way that you can measure harm.
So it's not a simple answer, and I would rather answer that very
accurately, if that's okay.
Okay. Yeah.
What I can point out, though, is that between October
2025 and February 2026, we had
1,000 less incidents of victims
involved in alcohol-related violence.
So we're seeing the trend of consumption coming down and the trend of
violence also coming down.
Right. Todd Stevenson's got a-
Just a supplementary just on the bill, just kind of line of questioning.
In the bill, isn't there some areas like same-day delivery where actually it's
introducing a regulatory regime that doesn't exist today and actually strengthening
protections?
Correct. Some of the concerns that we had heard from the public was around
those same-day deliveries or rapid deliveries of
alcohol. So we wanted to ensure that we don't just have
people drunk getting more alcohol very, very
quickly. So we have included within the bill
the fact that a delivery driver must not deliver to
somebody who's already intoxicated, and that they must ensure that
the person is over the age of 18. There are some
companies, and I won't name them because I'm not sure if I can, but
some companies that are actually already doing this.
And one of the things that I've heard from them, from two companies in particular,
is that if they do turn up to a home to deliver
alcohol and somebody is drunk or they're not 18 years old, that
they can remove that or not deliver it, so to speak, and take it back to
the bottle store and they'll still be paid.
So no one's missing out there except for maybe the underage drunk.
Right. We've got one last topic,
AML, and Mr. Carl Bates is going to put you on the
raft for that.
Thanks, Chair. And thanks for the work around
AML and the removal of red tape that that is going to achieve.
What is there covered in this budget to allow for the rollout
of the legislation that's been going through the house?
Yes. Well, the AML legislative changes that we're making are
quite huge. They're really big. You won't see a specific
byline for AML because, again, it will come under the
justice budget. But
what we've done is three pieces of legislation have already gone
through, and we have one more that's still coming, and that will be quite
substantial. But we're also looking at how we're going to fund it.
So we have already looked at a national strategy.
We are working in partnership with everybody that's involved with this as
well to ensure that when we do have this national
strategy levy regime come into force, that everybody's
happy with how it's actually operating.
We don't want to be doing things to business.
We need to work with business. And with AML, we all know that
things evolve very, very quickly.
We have different ways of being able to launder money.
And making sure that everybody is working together in a
realm that is effective for them is going to be very, very important
as we move through these regulatory changes.
So the policy work that you've got coming that's covered
under this budget period, is that going to further
reduce the compliance impact on business
across New Zealand?
Yes, that's right. I am currently working on a fourth bill.
Hopefully, I will have this finished and ready to be introduced before the
end of the term. But as I earlier mentioned, the justice team have one of
the highest amount of work-
Yes
... so you'll know this-
We know.
... Justice Committee,
going through. So actually trying to make sure that they can get that work done so
I can have it introduced. But we have already put through three pieces of
legislation, which is a really good start.
Not only that, it means that we will look a lot better when we are
evaluated with the Financial Action Task Force looking to
get that mutual evaluation underway next year.
We've made some really good changes, mitigating some risk,
again, removing unnecessary red tape.
And what's most important is for the man on the street-
Being able to understand this compliance is actually there to keep them
safe, not to just box tick, which is currently what's
happening over and over again for some people.
Thank you. Well, that is a glorious conclusion.
So I want to thank the minister. I want to thank everyone
who's come this afternoon. We are about to hear from the next
minister, so Bella, I'd like to thank you, Minister-
Thank you very much, Eddie
... for your start.
You've got Helen Clark coming in, but I see Dan's-
Helen White.
Helen White, did you say?
What happened to you, Minister?
Minister,
lovely to have you with us this afternoon.
I've got to say that you are last but not least.
Some of your colleagues beside you, we've seen before.
Some repeatedly. Some can't stay out of this room.
But anyway, it's nice that you're all here. So we've got 45 minutes.
Yeah.
Obviously, you'll do a short introduction, then we'll get into questions.
Yeah. Thank you.
So, it's always a privilege to be able to come and speak to the work
across government in a space that often isn't spoken about enough.
The conversation around family harm and sexual violence
is often a hidden problem in our country, and the
more that we can bring this issue into the forefront
of New Zealanders, the better. So beside me is Andrew
Kibblewhite, the Secretary for Justice and Chair of the
Interagency Executive Board,
and Cam Shirley, the Acting Chief Executive of the center.
I also have officials from New Zealand
Police, MSD, Corrections, Oranga Tamariki,
ACC, and the Social Investment Agency, representing the core
agency partners for the board. So if there are any
questions that you would like to have around those
agencies, there is someone here to be able to answer those questions.
I'm responsible for the Centre for Prevention of Family and Sexual Violence and the
Interagency Executive Board.
The vote amounts to roughly $20 million per annum.
20 minutes, Minister.
What I can't do as the minister is direct how board
agencies spend their money.
I can set expectations on them to work together with a system view and to
consider implications of operational decisions,
and I'm strengthening-
30 seconds
... those accountabilities through development of key performance indicators
moving forward.
That's time.
From the vote-
Ma'am, stop
... of about 20 million per annum, approximately 20% goes towards
community organizations. About $4.3
million in '26 to '27.
Much of that is the involvement in the multi-agency
responses to family violence. The center's activities
support the board and agencies to coordinate the all of government
approach.
The latest version of Te Aorerekura identifies the system shifts
that were needed and how they need to be achieved through successive
action plans. This is not a short-term plan.
This is a long-term plan,
and it doesn't matter which government is in place.
I'm sure that everybody across this table wants to see
better outcomes and breaking that cycle of harm.
So that's my biggest focus. The current action plan has prioritized
three focus areas: investing in commissioned
services, keeping people safe through strengthened
multi-agency responses, and stopping violence.
Each of these requires a sustained focus from successive governments
building on each step to achieve the change.
I'm also concerned about the increasing complexity of sexual violence,
and I know that a well-trained and capable workforce is
critical to caring for survivors and preventing re-offending.
I think I'll leave it open to questions because I think it's more important to
answer the questions than go through this in depth.
Nice.
But what I would say is,
it has been an absolute privilege for myself over the last two and a half years to
go up and down the country,
speak to organizations that may not necessarily have ever had a voice at the
table, speak to victims of violence,
victims of sexual assault, and hear their
experiences of the system. And being able to have that
opportunity to make those changes is an absolute privilege.
Thank you, Minister. We've got some new members.
I would ask that you
ask questions in the context of the budget.
Mm-hmm.
I'm going to start off with Helen White
Thank you.
We have a real
phenomenon out there at the moment in
sexual violence, and that's the strangulation issue.
Mm.
When I talk to people who are in
this sector, they tell me that very few
people engaging in this behavior know how
harmful it is-
Mm
... and what injury it is doing.
What are you doing in the funding this year
to focus on what is a really scary phenomenon
in terms of educating people as to the dangers
of that practice?
Yeah. Education is really important, and I absolutely agree that
strangulation has been brought front and center because of the
law change,
which made that a specific focus in legislation around
strangulation, because the harm that is caused by that is just
unacceptable. I also had conversations with
MEDSAC, whose job it is to show up and
actually take the evidence around strangulation, and making
sure that we have a plan moving forward, that we have enough
resources for MEDSAC to be able to actually get in front of these victims.
So there's two areas. There's crisis, when we actually
need somebody there, when somebody's come forward with strangulation, and there's
also education. So I will hand over to
Cam to have a conversation around a plan on keeping people safe,
and what we are currently doing across agencies, and if there's any other
agency that wants to speak to this in the form of education.
Perhaps just addressing sexual violence to start with.
We know this is a really complex space, and it's moving very fast in
terms of some of the behaviors and some of the means that we're starting to see
emerge. Minister's been clear with us, based on our
own advice as well, that sexual violence needs elevation in terms of our
broader priorities. So the Minister outlined the three initial
priorities, investing in commissioning well, keeping people safe through
multi-agency responses, and stopping violence.
We are over the next year just preparing some advice around what an
increased focus in sexual violence might look like, as well as workforce
capability, which is a really important part of that as well.
We've recently released and published some sexual violence
capability frameworks, which really set the standards
for both organizations and workforces to ensure
that
we are serving people as we need to and providing the necessary supports out there.
I'm not hearing anything concrete.
Can you tell me something that is going on that is concrete,
because it's so desperate?
Thanks,
Minister.
Thank you. I just want to acknowledge, you actually answered this question or a
similar question last time when we were in here, and I really appreciated
your candidness about the seriousness of the
issue. So I'm very interested in your participation.
Oh, thank you.
I feel like a frequent flyer, I think.
Yeah.
So firstly, you're right. It is a serious issue, and actually this is not a new
issue. That's the first thing, with family harm.
Since the legislation has come into being, what it's actually enabled us to do is
actually
action it and call it for what it is.
So we've really welcomed that, which is why there was actually so much lobbying
to get it through. What we've done is, if we talk about it from just a response
rate, and the amount of family harm investigations that we carry out each
year is significant.
So we have trained all our staff in relation to strangulation.
And of the significant number of family harm events and investigations that
we do every year, this is one of the key areas that we're looking for.
I think to your point, and you are very well-versed in this,
we know that we have to identify, we have to interview the
victims, we have to ask them specific questions about strangulation because it
is such a warning flag for more serious offending, i.e.
could lead to homicide. So it is something that we are actively doing in
our response. It is something that we are actively doing in our investigations.
And yeah, I'm happy to answer any other questions.
Probably what I would say, though, it's also a bookend, because
strangulation is part of a far wider remit for the family harm
scenario,
even if we go back to just the stalking and harassment that was
brought in recently. So the more tools we have, the more legislation we
have to enact it, that's actually a good thing.
But the training and the training framework that has been laid out from the
center, I'll speak on behalf of our
agency, but we have literally trained over 10,000
people, and we keep doing that in our family harm courses.
And so strangulation is significant for all of those courses for our
frontline. And it's also about supporting the community
organizations in that safety framework response
when you do have somebody coming through your door that has been
through, whether it be strangulation, sexual assault, rape,
that they have
an appropriate response to that and can be able to speak to
exactly what you're talking to.
What is the harm that's been caused?
What medical advice have you had, considering the harm that it might cause
medically? And who they can put that person in front of.
So it's about also training the response of community and
agencies. So it's not just about training government, it's about training agencies
in how to give the right information to those people who are walking through
their door who have suffered from strangulation.
So, Minister, part of the conversation we had
last time was about the blurring of the lines.
That there are young women in particular consenting to
this behavior, and in fact, the harm it's doing causes
things like dementia.
And that there is very little knowledge in young men or young women,
and probably older ones at this point, about the dangers of what they're
doing. What educational tools are we using in this space?
For example, I have suggested to you, Minister, that we look at
ACC doing a rollout on this and
educating. What are we putting in resource-wise in this
budget to education in this space that's
wide, that shocks people into understanding
the harm that is being done.
There are many programs across many agencies, where they are
focusing on education in those spaces.
I'm not over all the education programs, but there may be someone from
ACC in here that can speak to some work that they've been doing.
It might not necessarily be in the specific strangulation space, but
in the education space around-
Do you want to add something?
... harm and how to respond to harm.
If you want to say something, just come on up.
Yeah.
Kia ora. No
specific education programs on specifically strangulation.
But what we have recently done is released a campaign called Little
Matters, which is a toolkit for
parents
and providers, that gives them tools and
strategies so that they can
incorporate them in their day-to-day practical lives to
prevent child sexual abuse. So that's one of the initiatives that
we've recently
published.
Okay. In terms of one education favorite.
One education favorite.
I might move onto that issue that you're talking about.
Yeah.
Given you've given me the in on it, but I am concerned that
strangulation itself, it needs a program around this, and I'd urge-
Mm-hmm
... the minister to consider getting one.
Can I?
Yes.
As the board, we will be bringing advice in relation to what we're doing across
sexual violence. The minister's been clear that she expects us in the next
iteration of the action plan to be putting a stronger focus
on sexual violence.
Yes.
So as we bring that advice up, we'll definitely be looking at strangulation as
well.
Fantastic.
Before you change, I just want to make sure we finish this topic, right?
Mm.
So just, Assistant Commissioner,
you said with the change of the law, it gave the police the opportunity
to charge people to-
Mm
... call it for what it was. What I was just keen to do is get a bit
of feedback in terms of what that's meant from police
prosecutions or the way you're going about
dealing with offenders.
I'm trying to get empirical evidence what it has
meant.
So on that, actually, I've just asked for some numbers, so we can get back
to you. Apologies-
Okay
... on the actual prosecution numbers.
But look, what it actually means is, because we know and you all know, it is
such a risk. It's a flag. And so what
it's enabled us to do is actually go and investigate, look for the total
evidence, talk about what's actually happened, because
family violence encompasses so much.
Yeah.
And within the realms of family violence, if we want to break it down,
you have child abuse, sexual child abuse, you have rapes, you have
significant serious injuries. And whilst we're working really
hard in the multi-agency space, because we're bookending it, right?
In fact, in my 35 years, more than I've actually ever seen
before, of us coming together and working together to bookend it, to actually
prevent it, to reduce the serious incidents, to have that
harm de-escalation. But the reality is, it's still happening across this
country way too much. So what it enables frontline responders-
Mm
... to do, whether we are constables or investigators, is to go in and look at the
totality and to work really hard on that investigation.
And what it's enabled us to do is where there is strangulation, we can actually
charge for it in the appropriateness.
Yeah.
So that's where we're sitting.
Right.
And sir, I can get you the numbers later on this afternoon if you want me to.
All right. If you can do that, that would be great.
Just
any more questions on strangulation before Helen goes onto something new?
Right. Okay, Helen, let's-
Great. I want to go to that space. It probably is,
whoever can stay at the table, work it out.
Yeah, just stay there, guys.
The issue arose of child abuse, and we're seeing this
new phenomenon. The internet is so dangerous.
One of the things that I have been particularly concerned about is
the ordering up of child abuse overseas.
And there is basically now a market for this stuff.
500,000 Filipino children last year were
abused. As my understanding is, that's
500,000 where people in other countries like New Zealand have
been ordering up that abuse, and it has been happening, and
they've been paying for it on the internet.
And we have also children in New Zealand exposed to things that
are absolutely horrifying.
Mm.
What
is going on in that space,
given that this is
violence, this is sexual violence, and prevention of it
is the name of the game here?
The member has alighted on two of the issues that the board
has been particularly focused on this year, and that we're thinking about in the
context of the next iteration of the action plan, the sexual violence more
generally and the online harm.
So with both of those, what the center has done is
prepared an overview of current programs and of
the stats as we understand them. And we're now going through the
process as we think about the next iteration of the action plan, about what we
would put in that. We haven't yet finalized what will be in the
next version of the action plan. But again, the online harm, and
particularly for children, is something that would feature in that
Yes. You look like you've got an answer. No?
I don't know whether I've got an answer. I've definitely got an opinion on it.
So child exploitation online has been something that,
actually, internationally and globally,
we have been trying to confront for well over a decade.
And so the first thing, to your point, this is not a New Zealand
issue. This is global child exploitation, which takes many forms,
actually. And the more we go online, the more the exploitation can be.
So, for example, with police, we've had our online child
exploitation team, has been going for well over a
decade. I can't give you it. And our staff there
do a fantastic job, as do DIA, and that is why it's so
imperative that we link, and there is a global network of enforcement and
agencies who are grappling this.
The AI ability and the IT technology to
actually identify these images that can go all around the world,
the investigation technique to actually identify what country they're in, sometimes
what village they're in, and then to have the response is significant.
And it's a growing presence. But I probably just want to say, this is
probably an area, if we're talking child exploitation online, that we actually have
been working and building our skills with, not only here, but across
the world.
Yep.
Yeah.
Again-
And what, I guess, if we're going to be speaking to moving
forward, that will always be something that is invested in.
But if we speak to a realistic thing
that I've actually feel like we've made a real difference and a change,
and it may not just be in the online space, but it's in the space of protecting
children who may be trafficked around the country.
You'll notice the changes that we did in the adoption space, where we
saw that there was a gap in the adoptions legislation that
allowed children to be moved around the world using our
Adoptions Act, to enable that to happen.
So when I'm seeing things that, in New Zealand, where I can make a
real change and know that it's going to protect
children, I will advocate in that space.
But as Tasha said, this has been
a long-term issue that we'll be constantly invested
in.
What I would be concerned about, and it's good work, and it's amazing
that people even can handle doing that work.
It's so traumatic. But that's all ambulance at the bottom
of the cliff. What are we doing to stop that
material even occurring? Do we need to start to come
down hard on the technologies, given that those
tools also allow for this material to be identified and
prevented from being created? Basically, there's a market,
and we're allowing that market to occur.
Mr. Chair, can I just be really clear that the center
actually, within this budget, isn't responsible for
that specific funding. We can put together
a plan and a work program, which I'm responsible for, is
leading the direction of the areas that we would like
agencies to be focusing on. But there isn't anything in the
budget specifically for technologies in that space.
I'm clear on that, Minister.
I just want to make-
It's about what you're doing with the advice.
Yeah
I know you might be clear.
Yeah.
But I just want to make sure that the people listening-
Yeah
... are clear that it doesn't fall in the budget.
I'm glad you've done that clarification. We'll just have this one response.
Yeah.
I think, Assistant Commissioner.
I think the key thing is,
just because an issue has been around a long period of time, I would hate anyone to
think that anyone was apathetic to it.
And so to your point, it is a challenge
getting things taken offline when online is so visible.
But even today,
our police commissioner is in London.
He spent the day meeting with Google and other platforms.
We are constantly, and it's not just police, but from an enforcement
perspective, we're making sure that we've got the right international partnerships
to be having the right conversations.
Because actually, this is an all of us issue.
And so, we are doing that. We are actively doing that
across New Zealand and global, particularly around the child
exploitation. But, yeah.
Right. Now I'm going to go to the Honorable Marama Davidson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Kia ora, Minister.
Kia ora.
And all of the team.
Do continue.
I
really took on board your genuine concern at the opening of your kōrero.
I know how much this means to you. I know how much this work means to you,
and I've always been really clear about that.
I also know how much this work means to the departments and agencies
across Parliament, across government.
And that's why I'm quite concerned that
there hasn't been, over the three years of this government, any
additional funding, any new funding, in any of the
'20, '24, '25, or '26
budget.
It has become clear that even at the moment,
there is a proposal to cut 26 key roles
at the center.
The center which ultimately was to provide
an overview and a level of accountability distinct for violence
prevention that was not in existence beforehand.
And so I'm wanting to ask the minister how is she
able to reconcile this work as a
priority when she has received no
additional funding in any of this government's budget, but
in fact has faced funding cuts from previously
allocated funding to this really crucial work?
And I understand
and really respect the question.
But what I would say is, the review on the
center
is not about saving money or cutting back on
this important work. The process was commissioned by the
executive board,
and it was
not about reducing FTEs, or meeting a target or
baseline savings. So I just want to make that very clear.
This was about ensuring that the board and the center are
focused on the system being effective, well
coordinated, and delivering an impact in our
communities.
We've known for a while that there is not enough
accountability
across agencies when it comes to this space.
Absolutely.
I think we've had conversations-
Exactly
... in meetings together around this, and how do we create better
accountability. I think the center sometimes
became a distraction, where they were the focus and other
agencies would assume that the center would take care of this
stuff. And that was not, from my understanding, the
intent of the center. The center was there to support
agencies into making informed decisions around
where they move forward. And the board was created so that you
could have an around table of all the executives that have a role
to play in this space, talking to each other, and making
sure that when they were making decisions in this space, that they were making it
as a whole of the systems approach rather than a siloed
approach. Unfortunately, the center's
scope widened,
and there was a bit of
a confusion about what was the purpose of the center.
This came from the sector itself, up and down the country, having
conversations with the sector, not really understanding
what the center's role was. So
no final decisions have been
made around what the center's going to look like, but the discussion
is how can we make the center as efficient as possible
to support agencies to make really informed decisions and
choices. So over the last two years, the center
has done some pretty amazing work at building the
foundation of what we currently have.
So when I say that, I mean we did not have a very good
view of where our money was going, and where we were
spending it, and whether we were having an effective outcome in our communities.
The center has been able to draw together the data from across the
whole of government, to have a real clear understanding
of where our direct spend and family harm and sexual
violence is going. We are able to now break that down into
sexual violence or family harm spend.
We are able to break that down now into regions.
What is our spend in the regions, and what kind of outcome are we having
in those regions? Now that we have that clear
framework of where we have started, we can make really informed
decisions moving forward. In regards to
contracts,
I have not been made aware,
and you can correct me if I'm wrong, of a single agency
that has had a current contract stopped.
What I've been made aware of is there were a lot of contracts that had time
limited funding,
that came to an end, and a decision had to be made by
agencies whether that time limited funding was going to become
business as usual, or whether they were going to redirect their focus into a
different space. And that is the current process that is happening.
So I think we have to be very clear rather than just saying cuts,
that time limited funding is not a guarantee for future funding,
and we have to make really informed decisions.
Thank you, Minister.
Were you going to say something, Mr. Kibble?
If I might, I want to-- A couple of points.
The first issue on the funding issues.
Mm-hmm.
As far as the center goes, we've actually looked to protect the center from
the specific funding cuts-
Mm-hmm
... that other agencies-
Okay
... have experienced. And even the change proposal that's underway at the moment,
it does generate some savings, but those savings
are not an obligation from outside, and they will stay within the center.
So they will give more leverage to the board to be able to
deploy those funds. So the other part of the funding, as the
minister sets out, the center's done a lot of really good work at understanding
the landscape of where the funding's gone.
It's working in closely with the Social Investment Agency across those
areas of government activity. Family violence and sexual violence is one of the
things that gets taken into account.
So there hasn't been big increases specifically coming for
family and sexual violence.
Mm-hmm.
But that's absolutely been taken into account when resource
allocations have been looked at across the board.
Understood. Mm-hmm.
And within the center, we've actually looked to protect the resources around
the center from the small kind of incremental cuts that
most agencies, including the Ministry of Justice, have had to deal with.
As far as the change proposal, the minister has described it well.
It is a change proposal that's underway at the moment, and it isn't a reflection on
the quality of the people in there or the caliber of the work that
they have done. I just would really acknowledge that.
I think the center has a strong Record
of achievement. But when the board did the review, the review
actually reaffirmed, the first thing it says is if we didn't have something
like this, we would need to create something like this because of the need
for agencies across government to work more effectively together.
But it went on to say, as the minister has said, that we have
lost some of the focus around those core functions, which are
fundamentally the same as when the board was established in the first
place.
We need a board that the agencies can hold each
other to account and do that with quite a sharp focus.
We need a board that can be giving quite strategic advice, such as we
talked about already in sexual violence and online harm.
So there is a sort of analytical strategic brain kind of
function that we need there, and we really need to be strengthening the work of the
other agencies to do their line delivery.
So that's very much the intent of the review.
As I say, it's out for consultation at the moment.
The staff there and others are giving feedback on it, and we'll have
to reflect on that.
Thank you.
Yeah, keep going.
I appreciate that. Thank you. Staying with
efficacy and of investment and resources, which of course are
precious,
but in light of
pressures on other agencies, the very agencies that you have an overview
across, and in light of what we're hearing from across the country and
community and frontline organizations who are fearing
funding cuts, not the least respected in Wellington, sexual violence
prevention and specialists, the only one in the Wellington
region, and one of the few in the country.
Can the minister, however, in light of a really
constrained fiscal environment,
what assurances can the minister give
that we can ensure that the center or the work more broadly
has the capability across its Māori, Pacific, and ethnic
workforces?
In particular, I believe your officials were talking about
the monitoring and reporting system performance,
and for some people, that might not feel like
frontline impacts, but it's crucial for efficacy.
Can the minister give some assurances that those sort
of guarantees across the work will be able to be upheld?
Yeah, and that's why one of the focuses was really around workforce
capacity and capability,
and actually encouraging agencies
to support community to build up their capacity and capabilities,
because that's so important that community feels like they are supported in that
space. There are many areas that we are doing that.
We're doing that in the form of microcredentials.
I'm actually off this afternoon to celebrate
one of the first graduations of a Pasifika microcredential in
Auckland,
because we need to make sure that where we see gaps,
where agencies don't feel so confident in certain
spaces, especially sexual violence.
It's raised with me up and down the country that some agencies are
very confident in the family harm space, but when it comes to sexual
violence, they will provide services, but the
confidence isn't as high.
So in my role,
everything that I do, I would expect agencies, when they're making changes
around the family violence, sexual violence space, where we are pivoting and
prioritizing
our spend,
that they are bringing those changes to the board for
discussion first around the board,
and Andrew Pillowit can probably speak to that more.
And my role is not about specifically
making decisions for agencies. It's about advocating to
make sure that every decision, when funding discussions are made,
are done with te ao māori kura and the focus areas of the
second action plan in mind,
and definitely, it's around strengthening that
workforce across agencies and community.
Okay, cool. Let's move on. More questions? Is there another question?
One more little one.
Yeah, you go for it. All right. And then I'll go to supplementary.
Thank you. Appreciate that. Thank you.
Is the minister confident that this government really
does continue to prioritize violence prevention?
Absolutely.
In the budget.
In this budget, absolutely. In the budget for the center, the focus
is now around now that we have this information,
now that we have a real good understanding, even region by
region. And I think it's really important to
express
that we now know our prevention spend and our
crisis spend. We now know our family harm spend and our
sexual violence spend. And if we have a good understanding in
our regions of what the
areas of harm are, we can refocus and
reprioritize to make sure we're having a really
focused
decision making a region by region rather than just
trying to guess.
Right. So Camilla Billif.
Thank you.
Yeah, just on the
Change program in the Centre for Family Violence or Sexual Violence.
Don't you think it's pretty cold comfort to those about approximately one-third
of the staff there who are facing losing their positions
to hear that they've been protected from other government
cuts? And
bearing in mind that some of these people are specialists who do deal with
quite significant matters in the family and sexual violence
matter.
There's no doubt that change processes, especially when jobs are
in question, are difficult and traumatic.
So
it probably is very cold comfort to staff to hear me
say that the budget has been protected, yet we are looking to make some
savings in there. What I would say about the staff is that they're really committed
to this kaupapa.
I've had a range of feedback, but very little
of it is saying that there wasn't some opportunity to sharpen up the way the
center functions and how it's working, but
I think the staff are processing that at the moment, and
we'll get quite a range of views through this consultation process.
Just finally, is it really realistic though to say that there's not going to be an
impact on the work that is done if such a
significant number of roles are going to be
potentially at risk?
Well, the challenge through this process is for us to
understand that we will be creating a
little bit of additional resource that can be deployed in other spaces.
And so that other deployment
will generate opportunities to do other things that we're
not currently doing. So on balance, the board's view is that
there is opportunity to tighten
up the
range of work that we do out of the center, bring it back to its core
initial purpose, which is around holding the agencies to account.
It's around helping chart the direction of where we go from here, and it's
about supporting the line agencies, often through accountability and
clarity, to do the work that they have to do.
As opposed to, as the minister said, sometimes I think the center
may have looked to compensate for other agencies,
and I don't think that's actually helping the system as a whole function better.
We're still having that conversation.
I'm going into it with, obviously, we've done some work. We've done a review.
We've been very transparent with the team about what that looks like, and there
will be feedback on it. So I'm open to receiving that feedback and
coming up with arrangements that are as effective as possible.
Right. Mr. Todd Stevenson going to take us into new territory.
I am, new territory. And the minister, in your opening, you talked about developing
KPIs, key performance indicators.
Mm.
Does that relate to the center, the board, both?
What do you see happening in that space?
And maybe kind of flies a little bit on top what Mr.
Kimber White was saying, because I'm assuming that the board, Mr.
Kimber White, has its own set of KPIs because you do want to obviously hold the
individual agencies jointly responsible for delivering things.
But maybe just talk a bit more about that because I'm interested in what they might
look like.
So it's about probably both.
Yeah.
But with the board, I think for a long time, there's been a
discussion around accountability for the board,
and making sure that they are doing
what was intended.
And sometimes things can happen where maybe it hasn't met the whole
of board's expectations, and there has to be some
KPIs set in that space. So that's what I'm working through at the
moment,
around how do we put KPIs in place. It may
not necessarily be myself putting those KPIs in place.
It might be the minister in charge of those agencies setting a
KPI specifically for those board members.
And obviously, is the idea of that to try and drive this joint
responsibility?
Yes.
And again, and maybe Mr. Kimber White-
Mm
... kind of comment from your perspective after the minister about-
Yeah
... how you view it, because obviously you're leading the board.
Yeah. Ministers are very clear across all these agencies
that the siloing has to stop. But we also have the conversation
with the community is the same. But we can't sit here
as ministers and tell the community to stop siloing and to work
together if we're not leading by example in government.
So I often say changing legislation and regulation
in this space is the easy part, but changing practice and culture-
Mm
... can be quite difficult. So it's about setting clear expectations about
how we want to work moving forward,
which is as a system as a whole, rather than
individual siloed decision making.
So there will be
room for KPIs to set those accountabilities.
Yeah.
Right. I've got a-
I'd say measuring joined up-ness is notoriously hard.
Yeah.
You don't want to just measure meetings or meeting attendance
or
anything like that.
Heaven forbid, hey?
Heaven forbid.
So
I think it's actually a really hard question, but I'd answer it at several
levels. One is that we do publish overall outcome measures,
and we've
just published in the last probably month, and that was for
the preceding 18 months, and it's going to be every two years we will keep
publishing that. So that frames the overall performance in
family violence and sexual violence, and that tells a really interesting story.
So that gives us some comfort that some things are moving in the right direction.
It also identifies some areas where progress is proving
challenging.
But to say that all comes to the performance of the board is a bit
of a long bow. The next level is at the action plan level, and
that's where this minister and her predecessor have been
clear that you need action plans, and that those action plans should track what we
collectively hold each other to account for.
And we've actually done really well against the action plan that has been in place
and we're coming to the end of the action plan under Minister
Choate's leadership. And so part of the work that we're doing at the moment is
saying, well, because it's designed to be essentially rolling action plans, what
should the next
iteration of that action plan look like?
And that goes to some of the conversation we've already had and some of the areas
we think we will shift the focus to.
But so at that point, we'll then be looking and holding, as we have
with the last action plan, how are we delivering against that.
And that's probably our best sense of what we're doing collectively, because that
doesn't in any way capture all of the activity that agencies do, but it captures
the things that we identify are most important to be able to give a
cohesive, coherent effort. And so that would be the primary way
that we would hold each other to account.
Okay, I've got a quick supplementary from Rima Nakha, and then I'm going to finish
with Helen White with a new line of questioning.
Supplementary, thank you. Welcome, Minister.
Notwithstanding the name Elimination of Family and Sexual Violence,
would you say at this stage there is a clarity of purpose
from the board and
everyone involved, or are these actions like setting these
new KPIs and the action plan
helping to achieve more of a clarity of
purpose in terms of how we're going to reach
the elimination of-
So
I was very clear
when I first came into this role that elimination is an
excellent goal to try and have,
but it's a long way away. And so with the second
action plan, the focus, and you'll see the title of the
second action plan, is actually breaking the cycle of violence.
Mm.
Because with each and every person that we get in front of and we help,
we are breaking that cycle of violence, which will lead to eventually,
hopefully,
a close to eliminating the harm that's going on in our communities.
But the ultimate goal that we focus on is
breaking that cycle of harm with everything that we're doing across
agencies.
And every service we provide, every service that
we're commissioning, the focus needs to be around does it
fit into the seven focus areas of the Te Aorere Kura
action plan?
And are we making sure that we're measuring the outcomes of
that investment? Which is why the social investment agency work has
been so important.
Okay, now Helen White's going to bring us home.
Thank you. Project Whetū was something that was canceled.
$5 million has been returned.
It's an incredibly important idea to centralize and
to make sure that there's that kind of information
sharing. We're back to manual processes, as I understand
it, which are pretty seriously risky.
Can you tell me where are we at with a replacement for
this, and what's happening in terms of funding that kind of work?
Ultimately,
this conversation was had with the board because
it's all of systems approach. And I
wasn't given the
assurances from the board that they would support moving
forward with Project Whetū. So it was
agreed that now was not the right time to progress with this
technology project, and it will be reviewed and revisited
in the future. So what I would say though is, is all the work that has been
done is there, it won't be lost. But moving forward
with a massive technology project, I wasn't given the
assurances that I would be supported in doing that.
I'm advised that the total spend of Project Whetū over the past two
years has been around $2 million.
However, this resulted in not just work
on the technology project,
but the non-technical aspects of Project
Whetū are now being worked on and rolled out.
So, it's not all stopped,
but there will be conversations in the future about actually being able to
fund a major technology project.
Right.
But I'll hand over to Ken or-
Maybe for Helen still. Yep
I'll just go. Look, this is, I agree with you, a really
important piece of the puzzle when you're wanting to work around
families, individuals, children and harm.
You want to be able to connect information up from the different agencies that are
working on it. It's why the multi-agency tables are an important piece of the
puzzle. The technology bit of Project Whetū was to provide-
Mm
... kind of a technology underpinning for that.
We are not without any underpinning at the moment.
Mm.
We're still using the police,
FSS, the family safety system, and that still is functioning and
we're grateful to police for keeping that moving.
But it's not a nationally consistent or a
standard process. So the
idea will return for Project Whetū.
The work we've done thus far has actually put us in a much better
position to keep building out the systems in the various
locations where we are working on the multi-agency
responses. There's a lot of work going on in the digital space across
government. I think as that starts to settle, there will absolutely be
opportunity for us to then ask whether any of the different
information sharing or case management systems that are existing in some of the
core agencies, which could be police, it could be MSD, it could be
Oranga Tamariki, whether some of those systems can be adapted
to give us what we need in the Project Whetū space.
So, as a board, at the end of the day, we did not have-
Nice
... enough of an alignment and clarity around
hosting and an ability to push the project forward at this point.
So I would say it's a pushing pause rather than a stopping forever.
But for now, we're progressing by making sure we get the online work-
Time for one more question
... and location work functioning properly.
I think we're going to have this last question, right?
I think we've had a good answer.
Yeah, it's just to say, it has always worried me that we haven't got
these systems across the children's sector anyway.
Have you looked at the possibility of connecting it up with risk
systems for children in particular?
Can I? I'll just speak to the children's system,
because the children's technology system is very
old, very clunky. It's a system called SIRAS.
And Oranga Tamariki has put in a massive investment
into upgrading SIRAS to make sure that we can actually
have information on hand about young people, and
their needs, what needs have been met and haven't been met at the click
of a button. So there's not no technology
upgrades going on across the system.
The children's system is getting an upgrade,
but it might not necessarily be Project Whetū.
But there are upgrades happening.
All right. I'm going to call it quits at that point.
Thank you, Minister, for attending today.
Thank you for your department or your center, I should say.
And, Mr. Kimber, I hope enjoy your quiet whiskey tonight
or whatever you drink. But hopefully-
You can go home now maybe
... you can go home.